---
title: The forms of death
date: 2014-10-28
description: Data is often constrained, and sometimes distorted, by the tools and questions used to collect it.
---

[What death certificates can tell us, and what they can’t](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/04/07/final-forms) by Kathryn Schulz.

> This is precisely the problem posed by death certificates: when filling them out, how far back should we chase the causal chain? If a stubbed toe initiates a fatal sequence of events, is it the underlying cause? Alternatively, how far forward should we chase it? If we are someday able to parse “rupture of myocardium” into its sequential parts, will it cease to be a final cause? And how many causal chains should we chase? To the annoyance of statisticians, it is perfectly possible to die of multiple causes; indeed, as more people live into extreme old age, multifactorial deaths might well become the norm. But multiple causes of death do messy things to mortality data—reporting that one person died of three causes makes it look like three hundred per cent of your population died—and death certificates are not optimized for that kind of recording.




#### Random notes

Fun story from the [Center for Investigative Reporting](https://beta.cironline.org/reports/california-water-officials-arent-following-own-call-for-conservation/):

> RIVERSIDE, Calif. – Mike Soubirous is a prodigious water user, pumping more than 1 million gallons per year at his lushly landscaped home on a hot, windy Southern California hilltop.

> Soubirous also is a member of the Riverside City Council, which in July voted unanimously to impose tough new water conservation rules in this desert city of 317,000.

> Last month at Riverside Councilman Mike Soubirous’ home, sprinklers were seen running seven nights in a row.
Credit: Stuart Palley for CIR
Yet as California’s drought worsened from 2012 to 2013, he consumed enough water to supply eight California households – more than any other top water official in the state, records show.

The source of the records:

> Water bills obtained via the state’s Public Records Act show that in 2013, nearly half of the officials who supervise the state’s biggest water agencies used more water than the typical California household.

